README.md, before:

# Bikesy Server

This is how to setup this version of graphserver to work with OSM data to create a bike routing server.  The instructions below create a server running 9 instances of graphserver to do bike routing on a variety of hill and safety scenarios for the San Francisco Bay Area. Modify as needed.

You can see a live implementation and more documentation here: http://bikesy.com

## Server setup

### EC2 setup
If you want to use Amazon EC2 to host graphserver, here are the steps
* Create an EC2 instance "amzn-ami-pv-2016.03.1.x86_64-ebs (ami-8ff710e2)"
* Create a 60 gig volume in the same zone as your instance
* Mount the volume to a directory
    sudo mkfs -t ext4 /dev/sdf
    sudo mkdir /mnt/bayarea
    sudo mount /dev/sdf /mnt/bayarea

### Enable Swap (optional)

    sudo mkswap /dev/xvdg
    sudo swapon /dev/xvdg

### Setup prereqs
    sudo yum install git gcc gcc-c++ python-setuptools python-devel python-pip java-1.8.0

### Get graphserver and install with python wrappers
    git clone https://github.com/brendannee/bikesy-server
    cd bikesy-server/pygs
    sudo python setup.py install

### Install libspatialindex
    mkdir ~/downloads
    cd ~/downloads
    wget http://download.osgeo.org/libspatialindex/spatialindex-src-1.8.5.tar.gz
    gunzip spatialindex-src-1.8.5.tar.gz
    tar -xvf spatialindex-src-1.8.5.tar
    cd spatialindex-src-1.8.5
    ./configure --prefix=/usr
    make
    sudo make install
    sudo /sbin/ldconfig

### Install rtree
    sudo pip install RTree

### Install osmosis
    mkdir ~/downloads/osmosis
    cd ~/downloads/osmosis
    wget http://bretth.dev.openstreetmap.org/osmosis-build/osmosis-latest.zip
    unzip osmosis-latest.zip
    chmod a+x bin/osmosis

## Data Preparation

### Download OSM data
Download data for the US states you want

    cd /mnt/bayarea
    wget https://download.geofabrik.de/north-america/us/california-latest.osm.bz2
    bunzip2 california-latest.osm.bz2

### Merge OSM data if needed
If you are supporting more than one state, you'll need to merge it.

    ~/downloads/osmosis/bin/osmosis --rx california-latest.osm  --rx nevada-latest.osm --merge --wx california-nevada.osm

### Cut down the OSM data to a bounding box
Choose your bounding box - for example:

Bay Area:
    38.317,-123.029 : 37.3064,-121.637
    38.064476, -122.769606 : 37.459723, -121.611723

The Mission:
    37.772,-122.428 : 37.733,-122.4

San Francisco:
    37.9604,-122.5772 : 37.6746,-122.1151

Lake Tahoe:
    39.368232, -120.345042 : 38.750276, -119.659482

Use Osmosis to cut out just the OSM data within your bounding box. Be sure to use the `completeWays=yes` option for `bounding-box`

For now, San Francisco has been set up to reject certain surface types, but Tahoe has been set up to accept certain surface types. Ways without a Surface tag are included in the former case but excluded in the latter case.

    Bay Area:
    ~/downloads/osmosis/bin/osmosis --read-xml california-latest.osm --bounding-box left=-122.769606 bottom=37.459723 right=-121.611723 top=38.064476 completeWays=yes --tf accept-ways highway=* --tf reject-ways surface=dirt,grass,clay,sand,earth,pebblestone,ground,grass_paver,unpaved,woodchips,snow,ice,salt --write-xml bayarea.osm

    The Mission:
    ~/downloads/osmosis/bin/osmosis --read-xml california-latest.osm --bounding-box left=-122.428 bottom=37.733 right=-122.4 top=37.772 completeWays=yes --tf accept-ways highway=* --tf reject-ways surface=dirt,grass,clay,sand,earth,pebblestone,ground,grass_paver,unpaved,woodchips,snow,ice,salt --write-xml bayarea.osm

    Lake Tahoe:
    ~/downloads/osmosis/bin/osmosis --read-xml california-nevada.osm --bounding-box left=-120.345042 bottom=38.750276 right=-119.659482 top=39.368232 completeWays=yes --tf accept-ways highway=* --tf accept-ways surface=paved,asphalt,concrete,wood --write-xml tahoe.osm

### Make an osmdb file
    gs_osmdb_compile bayarea.osm bayarea.osmdb

    gs_osmdb_compile tahoe.osm tahoe.osmdb

or

    python pygs/graphserver/ext/osm/osmdb.py bayarea.osm bayarea.osmdb

### Get DEM data from the USGS
    mkdir elevation

a) Download highest quality DEM available from http://nationalmap.gov/3DEP/index.html, in GridFloat format
   - click "Download Data"
   - select "Coordinates" and enter in your bounding box and click "Draw AOI"
   - Unselect everything except 1/3 arc-second DEM, in GridFloat format
   - It will give you several downloads, corresponding to different sections of the requested area. Download them all.

b) Unzip the gridfloats into their own folder

### Compile a profiledb file
Pass in each of the .flt files you downloaded above that cover every part of the area that you'd like route on.

    Bay Area:
    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/profile.py bayarea.osmdb bayarea.profiledb 10 elevation/04507044/04507044.flt elevation/06932766/06932766.flt elevation/26582513/26582513.flt elevation/55614802/55614802.flt elevation/59476301/59476301.flt elevation/77723440/77723440.flt elevation/82362642/82362642.flt elevation/94430404/94430404.flt

    Tahoe:
    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/profile.py tahoe.osmdb tahoe.profiledb 10 elevation/n39w120/floatn39w120_13.flt elevation/n39w121/floatn39w121_13.flt elevation/n40w120/floatn40w120_13.flt  elevation/n40w121/floatn40w121_13.flt

### Optional: run create.py script to automate the following steps

    sudo python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/create.py

### Fold profiledb and osmdb into a compiled graph

Specify the weights you'd like to apply to each link type

Bay Area:
    gs_compile_gdb -o bayarea.osmdb -p bayarea.profiledb -s "motorway:100" -s "motorway_link:100" -s "trunk:1.2" -s "trunk_link:1.2" -s "primary:1.1" -s "primary_link:1.1" -s "secondary:1" -s "secondary_link:1" -s "residential:1" -s "living_street:1" -s "steps:3" -s "track:1.1" -s "pedestrian:1.1" -s "path:1.1" -s "cycleway:0.9" -c "lane:0.9" -c "track:0.9" -c "path:0.9" -b "designated:0.9" -b "yes:0.9" -r "bicycle:0.9" -a "private:100" -a "no:100" bayarea.gdb

Tahoe Low:
    gs_compile_gdb -o tahoe.osmdb -p tahoe.profiledb -s "motorway:100" -s "motorway_link:100" -s "trunk:1.2" -s "trunk_link:1.2" -s "primary:1.1" -s "primary_link:1.1" -s "secondary:1" -s "secondary_link:1" -s "residential:1" -s "living_street:1" -s "steps:3" -s "track:1.1" -s "pedestrian:1.1" -s "path:0.8" -s "cycleway:0.8" -c "lane:0.9" -c "track:0.9" -c "path:0.8" -b "designated:0.9" -b "yes:0.9" -r "bicycle:0.9" -a "private:100" -a "no:100" tahoe.gdb

Tahoe High:
    gs_compile_gdb -o tahoe.osmdb -p tahoe.profiledb -s "motorway:100" -s "motorway_link:100" -s "trunk:1.5" -s "trunk_link:1.5" -s "primary:1.4" -s "primary_link:1.4" -s "secondary:1.2" -s "secondary_link:1.2" -s "residential:.9" -s "living_street:.9" -s "steps:2" -s "track:.9" -s "pedestrian:1" -s "path:0.5" -s "cycleway:0.5" -c "lane:0.6" -c "track:0.6" -c "path:0.5" -b "designated:0.6" -b "yes:0.6" -r "bicycle:0.6" -a "private:100" -a "no:100" tahoe.gdb

  -s - specifies an OSM highway key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:highway
  -c - specifies an OSM cycleway key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:cycleway
  -b - specifies an OSM bicycle key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:bicycle
  -r - specifies an OSM route key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:route
  -a - specifies an OSM access key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:access


### Edit WalkOptions members in ch.py
For each set of contraction hierarchy graphs, edit the WalkOptions numbers in ch.py to suit your preferences, then:
    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/ch.py ./bayarea

    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/ch.py ./tahoe

### Create the shortcut cache
    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/shortcut_cache.py ./bayarea

    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/shortcut_cache.py ./tahoe

### Setup config file

    cd ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner
    cp config-example.json config.json

Edit `config.json` as needed.

## Setup the web server

### Install and configure Nginx

    sudo python -m pip install uwsgi

    sudo yum install nginx

    sudo vi /etc/nginx/nginx.conf

Find the location / section, and change it to as follow:

    location / {
        include uwsgi_params;
        uwsgi_pass 127.0.0.1:10080;
    }

### Start nginx

    sudo service nginx start
    sudo chkconfig nginx on

### Enable Logs

    sudo touch /var/log/uwsgi.log
    sudo chmod 777 /var/log/uwsgi.log

### Run the routesever

    cd ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner && uwsgi --yaml ./routeserver.yaml

To see what is going on, tail the logs:

    tail /var/log/uwsgi.log -f

### Sample API call

http://ec2-52-39-88-148.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/?lat1=38&lng1=-121&lat2=37.9&lng2=-121

## Manage the web server

### Stop the routeserver

    sudo service nginx stop
    sudo kill -INT `cat /tmp/uwsgi.pid`

or

    killall -s INT uwsgi

### Review Logs

    /var/log/nginx/error.log
    /var/log/uwsgi.log

## Create Bike facility overlays from OSM file
    These steps are going to depend on your region
    Set the OSM_REGION_FILE as needed:
    ```
    export OSM_REGION_FILE="bayarea.osm"
    export OSM_REGION_FILE="tahoe.osm"
    ```
    Also, for tahoe, change `bicycle=designated,yes` to only `bicycle=designated`. The OSM data in Tahoe has been cleaned such that all ways that we want to include on the map are tagged with `bicycle=designated.`

    ```
    export ALLOWED_BICYCLE_TAGS="desginated,yes"
    export ALLOWED_BICYCLE_TAGS="designated"


### Class I

    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=path --tf accept-ways bicycle=$ALLOWED_BICYCLE_TAGS --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class1-1.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=cycleway --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class1-2.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=footway --tf accept-ways bicycle=$ALLOWED_BICYCLE_TAGS --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class1-3.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml class1-1.osm --rx class1-2.osm --rx class1-3.osm --merge --merge --wx class1.osm

### Class II

    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=residential,unclassified,tertiary,secondary,primary,trunk --tf accept-ways cycleway=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class2-1.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=residential,unclassified,tertiary,secondary,primary,trunk --tf accept-ways cycleway:left=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class2-2.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=residential,unclassified,tertiary,secondary,primary,trunk --tf accept-ways cycleway:right=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class2-3.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml class2-1.osm --rx class2-2.osm --rx class2-3.osm --merge --merge --wx class2.osm

### Class III

    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways lcn=yes --tf reject-ways bicycle=designated --tf reject-ways highway=footway --tf reject-ways cycleway=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class3-1.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=residential,unclassified,tertiary,secondary,primary,trunk --tf accept-ways cycleway=shared_lane --tf reject-ways cycleway=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class3-2.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml class3-1.osm --rx class3-2.osm --merge --wx class3.osm

## Convert `.osm` files to `.geojson`

Install osmtogeojson:

    npm install -g osmtogeojson

Convert files:

    osmtogeojson class1.osm > class1.geojson &&
    osmtogeojson class2.osm > class2.geojson &&
    osmtogeojson class3.osm > class3.geojson

## Optionally, minify the files

Install simplify-geojson and minify-geojson:

    npm install -g simplify-geojson minify-geojson

Simplify and minify the files:

    cat class1.geojson | simplify-geojson -t 0.00001 > class1.simple.geojson &&
    minify-geojson -w "name" -c 5 class1.simple.geojson &&
    cat class2.geojson | simplify-geojson -t 0.00001 > class2.simple.geojson &&
    minify-geojson -w "name" -c 5 class2.simple.geojson &&
    cat class3.geojson | simplify-geojson -t 0.00001 > class3.simple.geojson &&
    minify-geojson -w "name" -c 5 class3.simple.geojson

## Credits
Brendan Martin Anderson https://github.com/bmander wrote graphserver, the underlying system that handles the bike routing.

Commit message:

add intstructions to ignore points

README.md, after:

# Bikesy Server

This is how to setup this version of graphserver to work with OSM data to create a bike routing server.  The instructions below create a server running 9 instances of graphserver to do bike routing on a variety of hill and safety scenarios for the San Francisco Bay Area. Modify as needed.

You can see a live implementation and more documentation here: http://bikesy.com

## Server setup

### EC2 setup
If you want to use Amazon EC2 to host graphserver, here are the steps
* Create an EC2 instance "amzn-ami-pv-2016.03.1.x86_64-ebs (ami-8ff710e2)"
* Create a 60 gig volume in the same zone as your instance
* Mount the volume to a directory
    sudo mkfs -t ext4 /dev/sdf
    sudo mkdir /mnt/bayarea
    sudo mount /dev/sdf /mnt/bayarea

### Enable Swap (optional)

    sudo mkswap /dev/xvdg
    sudo swapon /dev/xvdg

### Setup prereqs
    sudo yum install git gcc gcc-c++ python-setuptools python-devel python-pip java-1.8.0

### Get graphserver and install with python wrappers
    git clone https://github.com/brendannee/bikesy-server
    cd bikesy-server/pygs
    sudo python setup.py install

### Install libspatialindex
    mkdir ~/downloads
    cd ~/downloads
    wget http://download.osgeo.org/libspatialindex/spatialindex-src-1.8.5.tar.gz
    gunzip spatialindex-src-1.8.5.tar.gz
    tar -xvf spatialindex-src-1.8.5.tar
    cd spatialindex-src-1.8.5
    ./configure --prefix=/usr
    make
    sudo make install
    sudo /sbin/ldconfig

### Install rtree
    sudo pip install RTree

### Install osmosis
    mkdir ~/downloads/osmosis
    cd ~/downloads/osmosis
    wget http://bretth.dev.openstreetmap.org/osmosis-build/osmosis-latest.zip
    unzip osmosis-latest.zip
    chmod a+x bin/osmosis

## Data Preparation

### Download OSM data
Download data for the US states you want

    cd /mnt/bayarea
    wget https://download.geofabrik.de/north-america/us/california-latest.osm.bz2
    bunzip2 california-latest.osm.bz2

### Merge OSM data if needed
If you are supporting more than one state, you'll need to merge it.

    ~/downloads/osmosis/bin/osmosis --rx california-latest.osm  --rx nevada-latest.osm --merge --wx california-nevada.osm

### Cut down the OSM data to a bounding box
Choose your bounding box - for example:

Bay Area:
    38.317,-123.029 : 37.3064,-121.637
    38.064476, -122.769606 : 37.459723, -121.611723

The Mission:
    37.772,-122.428 : 37.733,-122.4

San Francisco:
    37.9604,-122.5772 : 37.6746,-122.1151

Lake Tahoe:
    39.368232, -120.345042 : 38.750276, -119.659482

Use Osmosis to cut out just the OSM data within your bounding box. Be sure to use the `completeWays=yes` option for `bounding-box`

For now, San Francisco has been set up to reject certain surface types, but Tahoe has been set up to accept certain surface types. Ways without a Surface tag are included in the former case but excluded in the latter case.

    Bay Area:
    ~/downloads/osmosis/bin/osmosis --read-xml california-latest.osm --bounding-box left=-122.769606 bottom=37.459723 right=-121.611723 top=38.064476 completeWays=yes --tf accept-ways highway=* --tf reject-ways surface=dirt,grass,clay,sand,earth,pebblestone,ground,grass_paver,unpaved,woodchips,snow,ice,salt --write-xml bayarea.osm

    The Mission:
    ~/downloads/osmosis/bin/osmosis --read-xml california-latest.osm --bounding-box left=-122.428 bottom=37.733 right=-122.4 top=37.772 completeWays=yes --tf accept-ways highway=* --tf reject-ways surface=dirt,grass,clay,sand,earth,pebblestone,ground,grass_paver,unpaved,woodchips,snow,ice,salt --write-xml bayarea.osm

    Lake Tahoe:
    ~/downloads/osmosis/bin/osmosis --read-xml california-nevada.osm --bounding-box left=-120.345042 bottom=38.750276 right=-119.659482 top=39.368232 completeWays=yes --tf accept-ways highway=* --tf accept-ways surface=paved,asphalt,concrete,wood --write-xml tahoe.osm

### Make an osmdb file
    gs_osmdb_compile bayarea.osm bayarea.osmdb

    gs_osmdb_compile tahoe.osm tahoe.osmdb

or

    python pygs/graphserver/ext/osm/osmdb.py bayarea.osm bayarea.osmdb

### Get DEM data from the USGS
    mkdir elevation

a) Download highest quality DEM available from http://nationalmap.gov/3DEP/index.html, in GridFloat format
   - click "Download Data"
   - select "Coordinates" and enter in your bounding box and click "Draw AOI"
   - Unselect everything except 1/3 arc-second DEM, in GridFloat format
   - It will give you several downloads, corresponding to different sections of the requested area. Download them all.

b) Unzip the gridfloats into their own folder

### Compile a profiledb file
Pass in each of the .flt files you downloaded above that cover every part of the area that you'd like route on.

    Bay Area:
    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/profile.py bayarea.osmdb bayarea.profiledb 10 elevation/04507044/04507044.flt elevation/06932766/06932766.flt elevation/26582513/26582513.flt elevation/55614802/55614802.flt elevation/59476301/59476301.flt elevation/77723440/77723440.flt elevation/82362642/82362642.flt elevation/94430404/94430404.flt

    Tahoe:
    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/profile.py tahoe.osmdb tahoe.profiledb 10 elevation/n39w120/floatn39w120_13.flt elevation/n39w121/floatn39w121_13.flt elevation/n40w120/floatn40w120_13.flt  elevation/n40w121/floatn40w121_13.flt

### Optional: run create.py script to automate the following steps

    sudo python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/create.py

### Fold profiledb and osmdb into a compiled graph

Specify the weights you'd like to apply to each link type

Bay Area:
    gs_compile_gdb -o bayarea.osmdb -p bayarea.profiledb -s "motorway:100" -s "motorway_link:100" -s "trunk:1.2" -s "trunk_link:1.2" -s "primary:1.1" -s "primary_link:1.1" -s "secondary:1" -s "secondary_link:1" -s "residential:1" -s "living_street:1" -s "steps:3" -s "track:1.1" -s "pedestrian:1.1" -s "path:1.1" -s "cycleway:0.9" -c "lane:0.9" -c "track:0.9" -c "path:0.9" -b "designated:0.9" -b "yes:0.9" -r "bicycle:0.9" -a "private:100" -a "no:100" bayarea.gdb

Tahoe Low:
    gs_compile_gdb -o tahoe.osmdb -p tahoe.profiledb -s "motorway:100" -s "motorway_link:100" -s "trunk:1.2" -s "trunk_link:1.2" -s "primary:1.1" -s "primary_link:1.1" -s "secondary:1" -s "secondary_link:1" -s "residential:1" -s "living_street:1" -s "steps:3" -s "track:1.1" -s "pedestrian:1.1" -s "path:0.8" -s "cycleway:0.8" -c "lane:0.9" -c "track:0.9" -c "path:0.8" -b "designated:0.9" -b "yes:0.9" -r "bicycle:0.9" -a "private:100" -a "no:100" tahoe.gdb

Tahoe High:
    gs_compile_gdb -o tahoe.osmdb -p tahoe.profiledb -s "motorway:100" -s "motorway_link:100" -s "trunk:1.5" -s "trunk_link:1.5" -s "primary:1.4" -s "primary_link:1.4" -s "secondary:1.2" -s "secondary_link:1.2" -s "residential:.9" -s "living_street:.9" -s "steps:2" -s "track:.9" -s "pedestrian:1" -s "path:0.5" -s "cycleway:0.5" -c "lane:0.6" -c "track:0.6" -c "path:0.5" -b "designated:0.6" -b "yes:0.6" -r "bicycle:0.6" -a "private:100" -a "no:100" tahoe.gdb

  -s - specifies an OSM highway key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:highway
  -c - specifies an OSM cycleway key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:cycleway
  -b - specifies an OSM bicycle key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:bicycle
  -r - specifies an OSM route key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:route
  -a - specifies an OSM access key http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:access


### Edit WalkOptions members in ch.py
For each set of contraction hierarchy graphs, edit the WalkOptions numbers in ch.py to suit your preferences, then:
    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/ch.py ./bayarea

    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/ch.py ./tahoe

### Create the shortcut cache
    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/shortcut_cache.py ./bayarea

    python ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner/shortcut_cache.py ./tahoe

### Setup config file

    cd ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner
    cp config-example.json config.json

Edit `config.json` as needed.

## Setup the web server

### Install and configure Nginx

    sudo python -m pip install uwsgi

    sudo yum install nginx

    sudo vi /etc/nginx/nginx.conf

Find the location / section, and change it to as follow:

    location / {
        include uwsgi_params;
        uwsgi_pass 127.0.0.1:10080;
    }

### Start nginx

    sudo service nginx start
    sudo chkconfig nginx on

### Enable Logs

    sudo touch /var/log/uwsgi.log
    sudo chmod 777 /var/log/uwsgi.log

### Run the routesever

    cd ~/bikesy-server/misc/tripplanner && uwsgi --yaml ./routeserver.yaml

To see what is going on, tail the logs:

    tail /var/log/uwsgi.log -f

### Sample API call

http://ec2-52-39-88-148.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com/?lat1=38&lng1=-121&lat2=37.9&lng2=-121

## Manage the web server

### Stop the routeserver

    sudo service nginx stop
    sudo kill -INT `cat /tmp/uwsgi.pid`

or

    killall -s INT uwsgi

### Review Logs

    /var/log/nginx/error.log
    /var/log/uwsgi.log

## Create Bike facility overlays from OSM file
    These steps are going to depend on your region
    Set the OSM_REGION_FILE as needed:
    ```
    export OSM_REGION_FILE="bayarea.osm"
    export OSM_REGION_FILE="tahoe.osm"
    ```
    Also, for tahoe, change `bicycle=designated,yes` to only `bicycle=designated`. The OSM data in Tahoe has been cleaned such that all ways that we want to include on the map are tagged with `bicycle=designated.`

    ```
    export ALLOWED_BICYCLE_TAGS="desginated,yes"
    export ALLOWED_BICYCLE_TAGS="designated"


### Class I

    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=path --tf accept-ways bicycle=$ALLOWED_BICYCLE_TAGS --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class1-1.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=cycleway --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class1-2.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=footway --tf accept-ways bicycle=$ALLOWED_BICYCLE_TAGS --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class1-3.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml class1-1.osm --rx class1-2.osm --rx class1-3.osm --merge --merge --wx class1.osm

### Class II

    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=residential,unclassified,tertiary,secondary,primary,trunk --tf accept-ways cycleway=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class2-1.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=residential,unclassified,tertiary,secondary,primary,trunk --tf accept-ways cycleway:left=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class2-2.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=residential,unclassified,tertiary,secondary,primary,trunk --tf accept-ways cycleway:right=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class2-3.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml class2-1.osm --rx class2-2.osm --rx class2-3.osm --merge --merge --wx class2.osm

### Class III

    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways lcn=yes --tf reject-ways bicycle=designated --tf reject-ways highway=footway --tf reject-ways cycleway=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class3-1.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml $OSM_REGION_FILE --tf accept-ways highway=residential,unclassified,tertiary,secondary,primary,trunk --tf accept-ways cycleway=shared_lane --tf reject-ways cycleway=lane --tf reject-relations --used-node --write-xml class3-2.osm &&
    osmosis --read-xml class3-1.osm --rx class3-2.osm --merge --wx class3.osm

## Convert `.osm` files to `.geojson`

Install osmtogeojson:

    npm install -g osmtogeojson

Convert files:

    osmtogeojson class1.osm > class1.geojson &&
    osmtogeojson class2.osm > class2.geojson &&
    osmtogeojson class3.osm > class3.geojson

## Optionally, minify the files

Install simplify-geojson and minify-geojson:

    npm install -g simplify-geojson minify-geojson

Simplify and minify the files:

    cat class1.geojson | simplify-geojson -t 0.00001 > class1.simple.geojson &&
    minify-geojson -w "name" -c 5 class1.simple.geojson &&
    cat class2.geojson | simplify-geojson -t 0.00001 > class2.simple.geojson &&
    minify-geojson -w "name" -c 5 class2.simple.geojson &&
    cat class3.geojson | simplify-geojson -t 0.00001 > class3.simple.geojson &&
    minify-geojson -w "name" -c 5 class3.simple.geojson

These files will contain extraneous point features in addition to the lines we want. Open each file in QGIS, selecting only line layers and ignoring the points. Then right click each layer and export it to a new geojson file. Save the new geojson file into the data directory so that it can be served to the frontend, with name classN.geojson.

## Credits
Brendan Martin Anderson https://github.com/bmander wrote graphserver, the underlying system that handles the bike routing.
